well Palestinians living alongside
hundreds of thousands of Israeli
settlers in the Israeli occupied West
Bank and East Jerusalem say that
increasing violence has left them
worried for their lives and Futures the
United Nations says that violent settler
attacks on Palestinians have increased
since the Hamas Terror attacks of
October 7th and the war in Gaza and
locals say International sanctions
against some settlers are not helping
them DW's Tanya Kramer reports
violent Israeli settlers make their way
to the Village of assaa in the Israeli
occupied West Bank scenes that Anan
Ahmed knows all too well it happened
again some weeks ago settlers came down
the mountain from the settlement
frightening the children we have small
children at home they throw
stones this last time they injured two
people my wife's brother was shot at
twice here and here
the situation is
difficult Palestinian Villages as Assa
are almost surrounded by Israeli
settlements considered illegal under
international law violent settlers throw
stones destroy crops and olive trees
burn cars and property and it has
increased in recent
months we live on our land this is my
father's and grandfather's house there's
no safety there are children small
children this is forbidden they come and
destroy everything why they cause the
problems there is no security
ever the violence recently turned deadly
when a Palestinian volunteer paramedic
was shot and killed while treating
people injured by Israeli
settlers his colleague Bashar cayti was
at the scene he tells us several shots
hit their
ambulance Muhammad Musa was driving it
when he was hit and
killed we live through a difficult
nightmare facing tremendous suffering
but we are
steadfast we have seen many
Murs many
injuries but what we faced with a
targeting of our colleagues was the most
difficult in our years as medics
the question of whether a settler or a
soldier fired the Fatal shot remains
unclear the Israeli military said in a
statement at the time that they and the
Border police were called to disperse a
riot during the incident an ambulance
driver for the Palestinian red Cresent
was killed the military police have
opened an investigation and a command
review Into the circumstances of the
incident is under the
way Bashar says Palestinians feel they
simply have no protection here the
military is often seen standing by or
even accompanying settlers during
intimidating and violent attacks and
Palestinian security forces are only
allowed to operate in limited areas he
says International sanctions which have
been imposed on some settlers have not
helped the sanctions imposed by the US
on those criminal settlers don't change
much in
reality settlers continue to attack burn
and Destroy homes and act violently
towards the Palestinians in reality
these stabs have had no
effect back in asaia Anan Ahmed says he
fears most for his children who are
growing up in this atmosphere of
violence and we can now talk to Shuki
Friedman about the he's vice president
of the Jewish people policy Institute
and a senior lecturer in law at the
Perez academic center thanks for joining
us Dr Freeman how do you explain the
dramatic increase in settler violence
against Palestinians in the West
Bank First of all the increase of events
and violence is definitely concerning um
me personally is a a lawyer in Israel
and a CI of Israel but also it its
concern regarding International Arena
and our ability to enforce law within
the West Bank and therefore there is
definitely a necessity and
crucial necessity from side of the
government and their authorities to
become more determined and more
aggressive in enforcing as a law in the
West Bank but we have to try to
understand the reality and differentiate
between false reports and increase on
violent there are more events and this
event should be take care seriously and
should be investigated and prosecut
based on Israeli law we are and trying
to
be loyal to our laws international law
also in the West Bank but there are some
false reporting and then for the
experence in the statistics of the
increas in violent is not precise
always okay uh extra additional
investigations both journalistic and and
I suppose by the authorities would would
be useful uh but last month the US and
the EU already had conducted their
assessments and they imposed sanctions
on some settler extremists and
Associated groups uh what impact let me
ask you about that what impact are these
sanctions likely to
have first of all it was the first time
that the US sanctioned West Bank
settlers and the West Bank entities and
been followed by other countries also
the EU and this is definitely red light
for the Israeli government signing the
government signing the authorities here
in Israel to be much more determined in
enforcing the law with the West Bank and
these sanctions have a crucial and might
be dramatic influence on the settlers in
the West Bank and their ability to
continue their daily life because we
have to realize that sanction like this
work as a net through the financial
institutions and might um in a way
harest or um prevent Financial
activities not only of the sers that
been sanctioned by the US and EU but
also by others that are walking or
acting from the West Bank financially
and therefore it have
implication and also political
implication on Israel in the West Bank
okay so that the sanctions will affect
uh some of the settlers and the
organizations that they've been imposed
on but do you think it's going to lead
to a reduction in violence we heard
someone in our report there uh
Palestinians saying that so far those
sanctions haven't
helped you know the
major aim I se Target of the sanctions
by the us is to force Israeli government
to work more determinedly against the
settlers I don't think that settlers
themselves would have
any impact or redu her violent I think
that the role is on the government and
on the ideas that working the West Bank
the police working in West Bank to try
to uh protect Palestinians from this
violent and protect Israel from
Palestinian violence we want the West
Bank as far as we are still over there
calm and secure to all people that live
there and if there are settlers that
breaching the law and acting violently
it's the role of the Israeli government
to enforce the law over there and
sanctions should should motivate not
only the seters but mainly the
government to be more serious about it
what do you think has to happen next and
to what degree is this uh connected to
what's happening in Gaza how do you see
this going forward very briefly if you
can yeah so far s West Bank is more C
that expected we in Israel expected that
due to the seven of
October Massacre of Hamas and the war in
Gaza there will be more unrest and
violent activities from the side of
Palestinians and from the other side in
West Bank and so far Israel IDE
successfully containing this ER
potential violence but with we have to
look to the H long term and to think how
we contain and how we manage to H able
to have M life in the West Bank to the
extent we are still controlling this
territory Dr Shuki Friedman with the
Jewish people policy Institute thank you
very much for talking with us
today thank you very much good day